Roles landing page + reorg (#980)
osohq/oso: docs/content/python/guides/roles/getting-started.md

---
title: Getting started
weight: 2
description: >
    Get started with Oso Roles
---

# Getting started

When managing access to resources within an application, it can be useful to
group permissions into **roles**, and assign these roles to users. This is
known as **Role-Based Access Control (RBAC).** The `Oso` core library
comes with built in configuration for role-based access control.

In this guide, we'll walk through the basics of starting to use the
roles feature.

## Setting up the Oso Instance

First, we'll cover some of the basics of integrating Oso into your
application.

The `oso.Oso` class is the entrypoint to using Oso in our application.
We usually will have a global instance that is created
during application initialization and shared across requests. In a Flask
application, you may attach this instance to the global flask object, or the
current application if it needs to be accessed outside of the application
initialization process.

In order to enable the built-in roles features, we 
`oso.Oso.enable_roles` method:

```py
from oso import Oso
oso = Oso()
oso.enable_roles()
```

> ### Loading our policy

Author: Need to put this before enable_roles

application.

The `oso.Oso` class is the entrypoint to using Oso in our application.
We usually will have a global instance that is created
during application initialization and shared across requests. In a Flask
application, you may attach this instance to the global flask object, or the
current application if it needs to be accessed outside of the application
initialization process.

### Loading our policy

Oso uses the Polar language to define authorization policies. An
authorization policy specifies what requests are allowed and what data a
user can access. The policy is stored in a Polar file, along with your
code.

Load the policy with the `Oso.load_file` function.

```py
oso.load_file("authorization.polar")
```

### Enable Oso roles

In order to enable the built-in roles features, we 
`oso.Oso.enable_roles` method:

```py
oso.enable_roles()
```

{{% callout "Load policies before enabling roles" "blue" %}}

Oso will validate your roles configuration when you call `enable_roles`.
You must load all policy files before enabling roles.

{{% /callout %}}

## Controlling access with roles

Now, let's write our first rules that use role based access control. To

> setup the role library, we must:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
set up the role library, we must:
```

1. Add role and resource configurations to our policy.
2. Use the `role_allows` method in our policy.
3. Assign roles to users.

### Configuring our first resource

Roles in Oso are scoped to resources. A role is a grouping of

> permissions that may be performed on that resource. Roles are assigned

Reviewer: we can workshop this more later, but I think permission == (action, resource)

```suggestion
actions that may be performed on that resource. Roles are assigned
```

ah... which I guess is probably confusing given that the key in the `roles` dict is named "permissions"... although I think there's an implicit resource there (either the resource on which the role is defined or a related resource for namespaced actions).

I guess I'm fine with "a role is a group of permissions", but I still don't like "permissions that may be performed on that resource"

to actors to grant them all the permissions the role has.

We define resources in Polar using the `resource` rule. The `Org`
resource represents an Organization in the GitClub example application.
Let's walk through the resource definition for `Org`.

```polar
resource(_type: Org, "org", actions, roles) if
```

The rule head has 4 parameters:

- `_type` is the Python class the resource definition is associated with.
- `"org"` is the identifier for this resource type (this can be any string
  you choose).

> - `actions` are set in the rule body. The `actions` list defines all the
>   actions that may be performed on the resource.
> - `roles` are set in the rule body. The `roles` dictionary defines all the
>   roles for this resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `actions` is a list enumerating all the
  actions that may be performed on the resource.
- `roles` is a dictionary defining all the
  roles for this resource.
```

In our rule body, we first define the list of available actions for this
resource:

```polar
resource(_type: Org, "org", actions, roles) if
    actions = ["read", "create_repo"] and
    roles = {
        ...
    };
```

Now, we define our roles. Roles are defined in a dictionary that maps
the role name to a role configuration.

```polar
resource(_type: Org, "org", actions, roles) if
    actions = ["read", "create_repo"] and
    roles = {
        member: {
            permissions: ["read"],
        },
        owner: {
            permissions: ["read", "create_repo"],
        }
    };
```

This resource definition defines two roles:

- _member_: Has the `read` permission.
- _owner_: Has the `read` and `create_repo` permissions.

> Permissions are actions associated with a resource type. A permission can

Reviewer: This is a good definition — maybe moving it up would address my previous comment about 'permission' vs. 'action'

Can be a follow-up

Author: Yep, follow up.

directly reference an action defined in the same resource. Later, we'll

> see how to add permissions defined on other resources to roles.

Reviewer: this isn't perfect but I think it's a bit clearer

```suggestion
see how to leverage relationships between resources to grant a role a permission defined on a different resource.
```

{{% callout "resource(...) is just a rule" "blue" %}}

The `resource` definition is just a regular Polar rule. That's why it

> has an `if` and `and` between variable assignments. `actions` and

Reviewer: "variable assignments" sounds like the `:=` operator

```suggestion
has an `if` and `and` between clauses. `actions` and
```

Author: Punt

> `roles` are unbound parameters, meaning they can be assigned inside of

Reviewer: maybe not great if we can't assume readers know what unification is

```suggestion
`roles` are variables that we unify inside of
```

Author: Punt

the rule body.

> We could have written this rule without a body, like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could have written this rule without a body:
```

```polar
resource( _type: Org, "org", ["read", "create_repo"],
    {
        member: {
            permissions: ["read"],
        },
        owner: {
            permissions: ["read", "create_repo"],
        }
    }
);
```

> But, we think the expanded form is clearer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But we think the expanded form is clearer.
```

{{% /callout %}}

### Adding role_allows to our policy

To allow access based on roles, we add the following `allow` rule

```polar
allow(actor, action, resource) if
    role_allow(actor, action, resource);
```

Oso will now allow access to any resource that is allowed based on the
role definitions.

### Assigning roles to users

> Now we've configured roles and setup our policy. For users to have

Reviewer: could probably do another search-and-replace for this

```suggestion
Now we've configured roles and set up our policy. For users to have
```

> access, we must assign them to roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
access, we must assign them roles.
```

or maybe "we must assign roles to them"

We do this by writing an `actor_has_role_for_resource` rule.
This is how you tell Oso what roles

> a user has.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a user has for a particular type of resource.
```

> {{% callout "Managing roles with SQLAlchemy" "green" %}}

Reviewer: Should maybe move this above "We do this by writing an `actor_has_role_for_resource` rule." so that SQLAlchemy users don't think they need to write that rule

If you're using SQLAlchemy, there's nothing to do here!
Oso already manages role data as part of the `sqlalchemy-oso`
integration.

[Check it out here.](./sqlalchemy/getting-started)

{{% /callout %}}

You can use your own data models for roles with Oso. You just need to tell us
what roles a user has through the `actor_has_role_for_resource` rule. As an example, we might
add a method onto the user that returns a list of roles for that user:

```py
ROLES = {
    "alice": [
        {"name": "user", "resource": Page.pages[0]},
        {"name": "admin", "resource": Page.pages[1]},
    ],
    "bob": [{"name": "admin", "resource": Page.pages[2]}],
}

class User:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name

    # Get all the roles for this user
    def get_roles(self):
        global ROLES
        return ROLES[self.name]
```

And the `actor_has_role_for_resource` would be implemented as:

```polar
actor_has_role_for_resource(actor, role_name, resource) if
    role in actor.get_roles() and
    role_name = role.name and
    resource = role.resource;
```

The `actor_has_role_for_resource` is evaluated with `actor` bound to the same actor

> as you call the `allow` rule with, typically a `user`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that you call the `allow` rule with, typically an instance of some `User` model.
```

> `role_name` and `resource` are "output parameters".
> They wont be bound to anything when the rule enters.
> The expectation is that you will set them in the body of
> the rule.

Reviewer: this is too verbose and still not as clear as I would like it to be

```suggestion
`role_name` and `resource` are "output parameters".
In the body of the `actor_has_role_for_resource` rule, you
should unify `role_name` with the name of the actor's role and
`resource` with the instance the actor has the role for. In
the example above, Bob has the `"admin"` role for the
`Page.pages[2]` resource, so when `role in actor.get_roles()` is
evaluated with Bob as the `actor`, `role.name` will return `"admin"`
and `role.resource` will return `Page.pages[2]`.
```

### Implying roles

The `"owner"` role is a more permissive role than `"member"`. It
covers all the permissions of `"member"`, with some additional
permissions granted (`"create_repo"`) in our example.

Instead of duplicating the permissions, we can represent this

> relationship in our policy using **implied roles**.

Reviewer: this is well done

```polar
resource(_type: Org, "org", actions, roles) if
    actions = ["read", "create_repo"] and
    roles = {
        member: {
            permissions: ["read"],
        },
        owner: {
            permissions: ["create_repo"],
            implies: ["member"]
        }
    };
```

> The `"owner"` now implies the `"member"` role. Any user with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `"owner"` role now implies the `"member"` role. Any user with the
```

`"owner"` role will be granted all permissions associated with both
roles.

Here's the full `Org` resource definition from the GitClub example app:

{{< literalInclude
    path="examples/gitclub-sqlalchemy-flask-react/backend/app/authorization.polar"
    from="docs: begin-org-resource"
    to="docs: end-org-resource"
    gitHub="https://github.com/osohq/gitclub-sqlalchemy-flask-react"
    linenos=true
>}}

Notice the `"repo:reader"` and `"repo:admin"` implications. These are

> roles defined on another resource, Repository. In the next guide, we'll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
roles defined on another resource, `Repo`. In the next guide, we'll
```

> see how to setup **cross resource implied roles** like these!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
see how to set up **implied roles across resources** like these!
```

When managing access to resources within an application, it can be useful to

> group permissions into **roles**, and assign these roles to users. This is

Reviewer: comma splice
```suggestion
group permissions into **roles** and assign these roles to users. This is
```

> known as **Role-Based Access Control (RBAC).** The `Oso` library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
known as **Role-Based Access Control (RBAC).** The Oso library
```
